---
layout: post
title:  "learning to lose"
date:   2022-12-25 12:00:00 -0400
categories: life work hiring
draft: false
---

## losing is important

I lost a few battles and make a couple of mistakes in 2022. Looking back, there
were some architectural choices I might have made differently. We made some
product decisions that delayed getting our product into customers hands by a
little bit and there are some team building I'd definitely like to correct. This
is even more obvious going over 2022 OKRs and seeing how I performed. I was met
with the annual realization that I didn't accomplish everything that I wanted
to.

The thing is, on balance, this was a great year. The Alteryx Innovation group
accomplished a lot and I'm truly thrilled to see what customers have to say
about our cloud experience. None of what we accomplished this year would be
possible without our failures, including what I listed above. Every year, every
person and every company, will fail at some initiative they hoped to complete.
Success comes from how we respond to those failures.

## losing is hard

A few years ago I hired a young software engineer who had a lot of skill and a
lot of promise but not a lot of experience. I was at an early stage startup and
had a limited budget so took a chance on this person thinking I could spend a
lot of time with them and help them grow. It turns out, that was a bad
assumption. I was wearing a lot of hats at the time and didn't get to help
mentor this new engineer at all. They felt overwhelmed, I felt overwhelmed. Both
of our work suffered as we tried to make the relationship work and eventually, I
had to make a tough decision to let this person go.

This was a tough blow for me. Their inability to level up was my responsibility
and my failure. It cost the company time and money and stunted development of
that engineer's growth. It would be perfectly natural to fall into a funk. Many
people continue to blame themselves until their burn out and need to make a
change themselves. More people would deflect, and pretend they did nothing wrong
and that the real problem was the engineer. "If they really wanted it, they
would have figured it out." Instead of falling into these traps, we should learn
to embrace failure and confront it head on.

## learning from failure

### humility

One of things most important things I've learned over the course of my career is
how important it is to be humble. Failure can help to develop humility in a
number of ways. When we fail at some important task, it is humbling to realize
that we are not always as capable or as successful as we might have thought.
This helps us to recognize our own limitations and to be more open to learning
from others or seek help when we need it.

Failure can also teach us to be more understanding and compassionate towards
others who are struggling with a problem themselves. I have a teammate who often
gets into a rut when a ticket takes them longer than they thought it would. My
similar struggles (especially with anything devops) have helped me be more
empathetic. It's much easier for me to convey that programming is indeed hard,
and there's no need to dig ourselves into a deeper hole when we fail to get
something done as quickly or efficiently as we'd like. When we embrace that
humility, we become more open to new ideas and new solutions that we might have
otherwise closed our minds off from.

### resilience

When we experience failure, we often need to find ways to cope with the negative
responses that it can bring such as disappointment, frustration or anger. This
process of managing our emotions and finding ways to move forward can help us to
build resilience and to become better equipped to handle future challenges. In
addition, when we bounce back from failure and continue pursuing our goals, it
can give us confidence in our ability to overcome obstacles and to handle
similarly difficult situations. That confidence will help us when it comes to
meeting tight deadlines, rocky launches to new products and even help with
tumultous team dynamics. Knowing that, no matter what happens, we'll be fine is
a powerful feeling that's one of the most important lessons we can learn both
for our career and in life.


## learning to lose

I was recently speaking with Jay Henderson, SVP of Product at Alteryx, about
getting better at interacting with customers. His response was simple, "you just
need reps."

I think the same thing is true about losing. Put yourself into as many
low-stakes win / loss positions as possible and keep track of how you feel when
you lose and what you could take away from it. One of my favorite ways to do
this is to play games. Games are a great way to compete with very low stakes and
often give you clear feedback on how to improve. When I was growing up that was
sports, then debate, then video games. These days, my friends and I play a lot
of board games. 

It may seem hard to equate playing board games to making tough hiring decisions
and don't get me wrong they're very different. But getting used to the feeling
of losing, embracing that loss, figuring out what you did wrong and how you can
improve are all translatable skills. Getting comfortable with that process will
make it easier to work through some of "higher value" failures in your life,
like year-end OKRs.

## hiring losers

There are a lot of different things to look out for when hiring but two
additional things that will make a candidate stick out for me are: being an
athlete or being a musician. People who have played sports at any level, but
especially in high school or college, know what it's like to lose. Even the best
athletes on team's that won a lot achieved that success by getting beat in
practice, or in the weight room. They know how to take a small loss and use that
to build up the still necessary for success.

Musicians are similar. Very few people can sight-read music perfectly the first
time. Working through a new piece takes time, making numerous mistakes along the
way. Learning the hardest pieces well enough to perform them under pressure
takes an astronomical amount of trial and error. It's inevitable that a musician
gets frustrated when missing a note, but how they respond and build off of that
mistake is what makes them truly great.

Every engineer will have some failing tests, break a deployment or just hit a
wall when building a new feature. Hiring people who have the skills to cope with
and learn from failure is a crucial part of team building.
